Key steps and features of the experiment: https://journal.computationalcommunication.org/article/view/4731

“Off-the-shelf” dictionaries -> examination of 37 sentiment scores on large news corpus. The main focus is the relationship between news sentiment and U.S. presidential approval.
1.	To use a suitable sentiment dictionary
2.	The reliability and validity of the dictionary isn’t ‘built-in”
3.	The content length matter
4.	Multiple dictionaries are not suitable for testing the same hypothesis
It is used a dictionary to classify a piece of text by positive or negative sentiment.
The main problems of the off-the-shelf dictionaries are both methodological and theoretical.
-	The bag-of-words assumption
-	The grammatical functions of words do not matter
-	The additivity assumption -> more sentiment words, higher lever of actual sentiment
Lexicoder - > negated version of the dictionary (not goog and good bye are not  classified as positive)

THE DOMAIN-SPECIFICIY PROBLEM
Solution proposal: to reframe words related to a specific domain

Sentiment -> the writer’s appraisal or feeling
LIWC -> argues that the language and behavior are linked
In this study -> sentiment as emotions expressed in a news article

Study conduction
First part -> analysis of a set of dictionary-based sentiment scores
Relationship between news sentiment and presidential approval
Extremes in news sentiment = extremes in presidential approval
Two main variables:
-	News sentiment
-	Presidential approval
Presidential approval rating time series (since 1943)
News sentiment time series (date of publication, content length and sentiment scores)
-	From June 1, 1980 to January 31, 2006
-	Lowercase and tokenized articles

Dictionaries:
GI (GI+ and GI-), BL, LIWC (total affect, positive emotions, negative emotions, anxiety, anger and sadness), ANEW (ANEW valence, ANEW arousal, ANEW dominance), DAL (pleasantness, activation and imagery) MFD (MF Harm+, MF Harm-, MF Fairness +, MF Fairness -, MF Ingroup-, MF Authority+, MF Authority -, MF Purity+, MF Purity-), NRC (NRC Joy, NRC Anticipation, NRC Trust, NRC Surprise, NRC Fear, NRC Anger, NRC Disgust, NRC Sadness, NRC +, NRC -), LSD (LSD nettone and KSD absolute). (at-a-glance file).

Validity measurement:
-	Convergent validity
-	Structural validity (SVD)

Daily Time Series
The first step was to convert the millions of individual sentiment scores (one per article) into a regular time series, a single value per day.

A bivariate Granger causality test 
To test first the 37 sentiment scores with presidential approval
They did again the test using the subset of articles with the names of the Presidents (presidential news)
Moreover, they changed the dependent variable of the presidential approval to the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index and at the end some random noise.

Validity measurements
Positive and negative news sentiment may occur simultaneously
There is the possibility of a third variable -> article length

Granger causality
Article length as the Granger causes of presidential approval 
New variable = article length
